Provided proper attribution i s provided, Google hereby grants permission t o reproduce the tables and figures i n this paper solely for use i n journalistic o r scholarly works.

## Attention Is All You Need

Ashish Vaswani ∗ Google Brain avaswani@google.com

Noam Shazeer ∗ Google Brain noam@google.com

Niki Parmar ∗ Google Research nikip@google.com

Jakob Uszkoreit ∗ Google Research usz@google.com

Llion Jones ∗ Google Research llion@google.com

Aidan N. Gomez ∗ † University o f Toronto aidan@c s.toronto.edu

Łukasz Kaiser ∗ Google Brain lukaszkaiser@google.com

Illia Polosukhin ∗ ‡ illia.polosukhin@gmail.com


## Abstract

The dominant sequence transduction models are based o n complex recurrent o r convolutional neural networks that include a n encoder and a decoder. The best performing models also connect the encoder and decoder through a n attention mechanism. We propose a new simple network architecture, the Transformer, based solely o n attention mechanisms, dispensing with recurrence and convolutions entirely. Experiments o n two machine translation tasks show these models t o b e superior i n quality while being more parallelizable and requiring significantly less time t o train. Our model achieves 28.4 BLEU o n the WMT 2014 Englishto-German translation task, improving over the existing best results, including ensembles, b y over 2 BLEU. On the WMT 2014 English-t o-French translation task, our model establishes a new single-model state-o f-the-art BLEU score o f 41.8 after training for 3.5 days o n eight GPUs, a small fraction o f the training costs o f the best models from the literature. We show that the Transformer generalizes well t o other tasks b y applying i t successfully t o English constituency parsing both with large and limited training data.

∗ Equal contribution. Listing order i s random. Jakob proposed replacing RNNs with self-attention and started

the effort t o evaluate this idea. Ashish, with Illia, designed and implemented the first Transformer models and has been crucially involved i n every aspect o f this work. Noam proposed scaled dot-product attention, multi-head attention and the parameter-free position representation and became the other person involved i n nearly every detail. Niki designed, implemented, tuned and evaluated countless model variants i n our original codebase and tensor2tensor. Llion also experimented with novel model variants, was responsible for our initial codebase, and efficient inference and visualizations. Lukasz and Aidan spent countless long days designing various parts o f and implementing tensor2tensor, replacing our earlier codebase, greatly improving results and massively accelerating our research.

† Work performed while a t Google Brain. ‡ Work performed while a t Google Research.

31st Conference o n Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.arXiv:1706.03762v7  [c s.CL]  2 Aug 2023


## 1 Introduction

Recurrent neural networks, long short-term memory [13] and gated recurrent [7] neural networks i n particular, have been firmly established a s state o f the art approaches i n sequence modeling and transduction problems such a s language modeling and machine translation [35, 2, 5]. Numerous efforts have since continued t o push the boundaries o f recurrent language models and encoder-decoder architectures [38, 24, 15].

Recurrent models typically factor computation along the symbol positions o f the input and output sequences. Aligning the positions t o steps i n computation time, they generate a sequence o f hidden states h t, a s a function o f the previous hidden state h t−1 and the input for position t. This inherently sequential nature precludes parallelization within training examples, which becomes critical a t longer sequence lengths, a s memory constraints limit batching across examples. Recent work has achieved significant improvements i n computational efficiency through factorization tricks [21] and conditional computation [32], while also improving model performance i n case o f the latter. The fundamental constraint o f sequential computation, however, remains.

Attention mechanisms have become a n integral part o f compelling sequence modeling and transduction models i n various tasks, allowing modeling o f dependencies without regard t o their distance i n the input o r output sequences [2, 19]. In all but a few cases [27], however, such attention mechanisms are used i n conjunction with a recurrent network.

In this work w e propose the Transformer, a model architecture eschewing recurrence and instead relying entirely o n a n attention mechanism t o draw global dependencies between input and output. The Transformer allows for significantly more parallelization and can reach a new state o f the art i n translation quality after being trained for a s little a s twelve hours o n eight P100 GPUs.


## 2 Background

The goal o f reducing sequential computation also forms the foundation o f the Extended Neural GPU [16], ByteNet [18] and ConvS2S [9], all o f which use convolutional neural networks a s basic building block, computing hidden representations i n parallel for all input and output positions. In these models, the number o f operations required t o relate signals from two arbitrary input o r output positions grows i n the distance between positions, linearly for ConvS2S and logarithmically for ByteNet. This makes i t more difficult t o learn dependencies between distant positions [12]. In the Transformer this i s reduced t o a constant number o f operations, albeit a t the cost o f reduced effective resolution due t o averaging attention-weighted positions, a n effect w e counteract with Multi-Head Attention a s described i n section 3.2.

Self-attention, sometimes called intra-attention i s a n attention mechanism relating different positions o f a single sequence i n order t o compute a representation o f the sequence. Self-attention has been used successfully i n a variety o f tasks including reading comprehension, abstractive summarization, textual entailment and learning task-independent sentence representations [4, 27, 28, 22].

End-t o-end memory networks are based o n a recurrent attention mechanism instead o f sequencealigned recurrence and have been shown t o perform well o n simple-language question answering and language modeling tasks [34].

To the best o f our knowledge, however, the Transformer i s the first transduction model relying entirely o n self-attention t o compute representations o f its input and output without using sequencealigned RNNs o r convolution. In the following sections, w e will describe the Transformer, motivate self-attention and discuss its advantages over models such a s [17, 18] and [9].


## 3 Model Architecture

Most competitive neural sequence transduction models have a n encoder-decoder structure [5, 2, 35]. Here, the encoder maps a n input sequence o f symbol representations (x 1, ..., x n) t o a sequence o f continuous representations z = (z 1, ..., z n). Given z, the decoder then generates a n output sequence (y 1, ..., y m) o f symbols one element a t a time. At each step the model i s auto-regressive [10], consuming the previously generated symbols a s additional input when generating the next.



Figure 1: The Transformer - model architecture.

The Transformer follows this overall architecture using stacked self-attention and point-wise, fully connected layers for both the encoder and decoder, shown i n the left and right halves o f Figure 1, respectively.


## 3.1 Encoder and Decoder Stacks

Encoder: The encoder i s composed o f a stack o f N = 6 identical layers. Each layer has two sub-layers. The first i s a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second i s a simple, positionwise fully connected feed-forward network. We employ a residual connection [11] around each o f the two sub-layers, followed b y layer normalization [1]. That i s, the output o f each sub-layer i s LayerNorm( x + Sublayer( x)), where Sublayer( x) i s the function implemented b y the sub-layer itself. To facilitate these residual connections, all sub-layers i n the model, a s well a s the embedding layers, produce outputs o f dimension dmodel = 512.

Decoder: The decoder i s also composed o f a stack o f N = 6 identical layers. In addition t o the two sub-layers i n each encoder layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head attention over the output o f the encoder stack. Similar t o the encoder, w e employ residual connections around each o f the sub-layers, followed b y layer normalization. We also modify the self-attention sub-layer i n the decoder stack t o prevent positions from attending t o subsequent positions. This masking, combined with fact that the output embeddings are offset b y one position, ensures that the predictions for position i can depend only o n the known outputs a t positions less than i.


## 3.2 Attention

An attention function can b e described a s mapping a query and a set o f key-value pairs t o a n output, where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors. The output i s computed a s a weighted sum3Scaled Dot-Product Attention Multi-Head AttentionFigure 2: (left) Scaled Dot-Product Attention. (right) Multi-Head Attention consists o f several attention layers running i n parallel.

o f the values, where the weight assigned t o each value i s computed b y a compatibility function o f the query with the corresponding key.


## 3.2.1 Scaled Dot-Product Attention

We call our particular attention "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" (Figure 2). The input consists o f queries and keys o f dimension d k, and values o f dimension d v. We compute the dot products o f the query with all keys, divide each b y √d k, and apply a softmax function t o obtain the weights o n the values.

In practice, w e compute the attention function o n a set o f queries simultaneously, packed together into a matrix Q. The keys and values are also packed together into matrices K and V . We compute the matrix o f outputs a s: Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax( QK T √d k )V (1)The two most commonly used attention functions are additive attention [2], and dot-product (multiplicative) attention. Dot-product attention i s identical t o our algorithm, except for the scaling factor o f 1√d k . Additive attention computes the compatibility function using a feed-forward network with a single hidden layer. While the two are similar i n theoretical complexity, dot-product attention i s much faster and more space-efficient i n practice, since i t can b e implemented using highly optimized matrix multiplication code.

While for small values o f d k the two mechanisms perform similarly, additive attention outperforms dot product attention without scaling for larger values o f d k [3]. We suspect that for large values o f d k, the dot products grow large i n magnitude, pushing the softmax function into regions where i t has extremely small gradients 4. To counteract this effect, w e scale the dot products b y 1√d k .


## 3.2.2 Multi-Head Attention

Instead o f performing a single attention function with dmodel-dimensional keys, values and queries, w e found i t beneficial t o linearly project the queries, keys and values h times with different, learned linear projections t o d k, d k and d v dimensions, respectively. On each o f these projected versions o f queries, keys and values w e then perform the attention function i n parallel, yielding d v-dimensional4To illustrate why the dot products get large, assume that the components o f q and k are independent random variables with mean 0 and variance 1. Then their dot product, q · k = ∑d k i=1 qiki, has mean 0 and variance d k.

4output values. These are concatenated and once again projected, resulting i n the final values, a s depicted i n Figure 2.

Multi-head attention allows the model t o jointly attend t o information from different representation subspaces a t different positions. With a single attention head, averaging inhibits this.

MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat( head1, ..., headh)W Owhere headi = Attention(QW Q i , KW K i , V W V i )Where the projections are parameter matrices W Q i ∈ Rdmodel×d k , W K i ∈ Rdmodel×d k , W V i ∈ Rdmodel×d v and W O ∈ Rhdv×dmodel.

In this work w e employ h = 8 parallel attention layers, o r heads. For each o f these w e use d k = d v = dmodel/h = 64. Due t o the reduced dimension o f each head, the total computational cost i s similar t o that o f single-head attention with full dimensionality.


## 3.2.3 Applications o f Attention i n our Model

The Transformer uses multi-head attention i n three different ways:

• In "encoder-decoder attention" layers, the queries come from the previous decoder layer, and the memory keys and values come from the output o f the encoder. This allows every position i n the decoder t o attend over all positions i n the input sequence. This mimics the typical encoder-decoder attention mechanisms i n sequence-t o-sequence models such a s [38, 2, 9].

• The encoder contains self-attention layers. In a self-attention layer all o f the keys, values and queries come from the same place, i n this case, the output o f the previous layer i n the encoder. Each position i n the encoder can attend t o all positions i n the previous layer o f the encoder.

• Similarly, self-attention layers i n the decoder allow each position i n the decoder t o attend t o all positions i n the decoder u p t o and including that position. We need t o prevent leftward information flow i n the decoder t o preserve the auto-regressive property. We implement this inside o f scaled dot-product attention b y masking out (setting t o −∞) all values i n the input o f the softmax which correspond t o illegal connections. See Figure 2.


## 3.3 Position-wise Feed-Forward Networks

In addition t o attention sub-layers, each o f the layers i n our encoder and decoder contains a fully connected feed-forward network, which i s applied t o each position separately and identically. This consists o f two linear transformations with a ReLU activation i n between.

FFN( x) = max(0, xW1 + b 1)W2 + b 2 (2)While the linear transformations are the same across different positions, they use different parameters from layer t o layer. Another way o f describing this i s a s two convolutions with kernel size 1. The dimensionality o f input and output i s dmodel = 512, and the inner-layer has dimensionality d f f = 2048.


## 3.4 Embeddings and Softmax

Similarly t o other sequence transduction models, w e use learned embeddings t o convert the input tokens and output tokens t o vectors o f dimension dmodel. We also use the usual learned linear transformation and softmax function t o convert the decoder output t o predicted next-token probabilities. In our model, w e share the same weight matrix between the two embedding layers and the pre-softmax linear transformation, similar t o [30]. In the embedding layers, w e multiply those weights b y √dmodel.



Table 1: Maximum path lengths, per-layer complexity and minimum number o f sequential operations for different layer types. n i s the sequence length, d i s the representation dimension, k i s the kernel size o f convolutions and r the size o f the neighborhood i n restricted self-attention.

Layer Type Complexity per Layer Sequential Maximum Path Length Operations Self-Attention O( n 2 · d) O(1) O(1) Recurrent O( n · d


## 2) O( n) O( n)

Convolutional O( k · n · d


## 2) O(1) O( logk( n))

Self-Attention (restricted) O( r · n · d) O(1) O( n/r)


## 3.5 Positional Encoding

Since our model contains n o recurrence and n o convolution, i n order for the model t o make use o f the order o f the sequence, w e must inject some information about the relative o r absolute position o f the tokens i n the sequence. To this end, w e add "positional encodings" t o the input embeddings a t the bottoms o f the encoder and decoder stacks. The positional encodings have the same dimension dmodel a s the embeddings, s o that the two can b e summed. There are many choices o f positional encodings, learned and fixed [9].

In this work, w e use sine and cosine functions o f different frequencies:

P E( pos,2i) = sin( pos/10000 2i/dmodel)P E( pos,2i+1) = cos( pos/10000 2i/dmodel)where pos i s the position and i i s the dimension. That i s, each dimension o f the positional encoding corresponds t o a sinusoid. The wavelengths form a geometric progression from 2π t o 10000 · 2π. We chose this function because w e hypothesized i t would allow the model t o easily learn t o attend b y relative positions, since for any fixed offset k, P Epos+k can b e represented a s a linear function o f P Epos.

We also experimented with using learned positional embeddings [9] instead, and found that the two versions produced nearly identical results (see Table 3 row (E)). We chose the sinusoidal version because i t may allow the model t o extrapolate t o sequence lengths longer than the ones encountered during training.


## 4 Why Self-Attention

In this section w e compare various aspects o f self-attention layers t o the recurrent and convolutional layers commonly used for mapping one variable-length sequence o f symbol representations (x 1, ..., x n) t o another sequence o f equal length (z 1, ..., z n), with x i, z i ∈ Rd, such a s a hidden layer i n a typical sequence transduction encoder o r decoder. Motivating our use o f self-attention w e consider three desiderata.

One i s the total computational complexity per layer. Another i s the amount o f computation that can b e parallelized, a s measured b y the minimum number o f sequential operations required.

The third i s the path length between long-range dependencies i n the network. Learning long-range dependencies i s a key challenge i n many sequence transduction tasks. One key factor affecting the ability t o learn such dependencies i s the length o f the paths forward and backward signals have t o traverse i n the network. The shorter these paths between any combination o f positions i n the input and output sequences, the easier i t i s t o learn long-range dependencies [12]. Hence w e also compare the maximum path length between any two input and output positions i n networks composed o f the different layer types.

As noted i n Table 1, a self-attention layer connects all positions with a constant number o f sequentially executed operations, whereas a recurrent layer requires O( n) sequential operations. In terms o f computational complexity, self-attention layers are faster than recurrent layers when the sequence6length n i s smaller than the representation dimensionality d, which i s most often the case with sentence representations used b y state-o f-the-art models i n machine translations, such a s word-piece [38] and byte-pair [31] representations. To improve computational performance for tasks involving very long sequences, self-attention could b e restricted t o considering only a neighborhood o f size r i n the input sequence centered around the respective output position. This would increase the maximum path length t o O( n/r). We plan t o investigate this approach further i n future work.

A single convolutional layer with kernel width k < n does not connect all pairs o f input and output positions. Doing s o requires a stack o f O( n/k) convolutional layers i n the case o f contiguous kernels, o r O( logk( n)) i n the case o f dilated convolutions [18], increasing the length o f the longest paths between any two positions i n the network. Convolutional layers are generally more expensive than recurrent layers, b y a factor o f k. Separable convolutions [6], however, decrease the complexity considerably, t o O( k · n · d + n · d 2). Even with k = n, however, the complexity o f a separable convolution i s equal t o the combination o f a self-attention layer and a point-wise feed-forward layer, the approach w e take i n our model.

As side benefit, self-attention could yield more interpretable models. We inspect attention distributions from our models and present and discuss examples i n the appendix. Not only d o individual attention heads clearly learn t o perform different tasks, many appear t o exhibit behavior related t o the syntactic and semantic structure o f the sentences.


## 5 Training

This section describes the training regime for our models.


## 5.1 Training Data and Batching

We trained o n the standard WMT 2014 English-German dataset consisting o f about 4.5 million sentence pairs. Sentences were encoded using byte-pair encoding [3], which has a shared sourcetarget vocabulary o f about 37000 tokens. For English-French, w e used the significantly larger WMT


## 2014 English-French dataset consisting o f 36M sentences and split tokens into a 32000 word-piece

vocabulary [38]. Sentence pairs were batched together b y approximate sequence length. Each training batch contained a set o f sentence pairs containing approximately 25000 source tokens and 25000 target tokens.


## 5.2 Hardware and Schedule

We trained our models o n one machine with 8 NVIDIA P100 GPUs. For our base models using the hyperparameters described throughout the paper, each training step took about 0.4 seconds. We trained the base models for a total o f 100,000 steps o r 12 hours. For our big models,(described o n the bottom line o f table 3), step time was 1.0 seconds. The big models were trained for 300,000 steps (3.5 days).


## 5.3 Optimizer

We used the Adam optimizer [20] with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98 and ϵ = 10 −9. We varied the learning rate over the course o f training, according t o the formula:

lrate = d −0.5 model · min( step_num −0.5, step_num · warmup_steps −1.5) (3)This corresponds t o increasing the learning rate linearly for the first warmup_steps training steps, and decreasing i t thereafter proportionally t o the inverse square root o f the step number. We used warmup_steps = 4000.


## 5.4 Regularization

We employ three types o f regularization during training:



Table 2: The Transformer achieves better BLEU scores than previous state-o f-the-art models o n the English-t o-German and English-t o-French newstest2014 tests a t a fraction o f the training cost.

Model BLEU Training Cost (FLOPs)EN-DE EN-FR EN-DE EN-FR ByteNet [18] 23.75 Deep-Att + PosUnk [39] 39.2 1.0 · 10 20GNMT + RL [38] 24.6 39.92 2.3 · 1019 1.4 · 10 20ConvS2S [9] 25.16 40.46 9.6 · 1018 1.5 · 10 20MoE [32] 26.03 40.56 2.0 · 1019 1.2 · 10 20Deep-Att + PosUnk Ensemble [39] 40.4 8.0 · 10 20GNMT + RL Ensemble [38] 26.30 41.16 1.8 · 1020 1.1 · 10 21ConvS2S Ensemble [9] 26.36 41.29 7.7 · 1019 1.2 · 10 21Transformer (base model) 27.3 38.1 3.3 · 1018Transformer (big) 28.4 41.8 2.3 · 1019Residual Dropout We apply dropout [33] t o the output o f each sub-layer, before i t i s added t o the sub-layer input and normalized. In addition, w e apply dropout t o the sums o f the embeddings and the positional encodings i n both the encoder and decoder stacks. For the base model, w e use a rate o f Pdrop = 0.1.

Label Smoothing During training, w e employed label smoothing o f value ϵls = 0.1 [36]. This hurts perplexity, a s the model learns t o b e more unsure, but improves accuracy and BLEU score.


## 6 Results


## 6.1 Machine Translation

On the WMT 2014 English-t o-German translation task, the big transformer model (Transformer (big) i n Table 2) outperforms the best previously reported models (including ensembles) b y more than 2.0 BLEU, establishing a new state-o f-the-art BLEU score o f 28.4. The configuration o f this model i s listed i n the bottom line o f Table 3. Training took 3.5 days o n 8 P100 GPUs. Even our base model surpasses all previously published models and ensembles, a t a fraction o f the training cost o f any o f the competitive models.

On the WMT 2014 English-t o-French translation task, our big model achieves a BLEU score o f 41.0, outperforming all o f the previously published single models, a t less than 1/4 the training cost o f the previous state-o f-the-art model. The Transformer (big) model trained for English-t o-French used dropout rate Pdrop = 0.1, instead o f 0.3.

For the base models, w e used a single model obtained b y averaging the last 5 checkpoints, which were written a t 10-minute intervals. For the big models, w e averaged the last 20 checkpoints. We used beam search with a beam size o f 4 and length penalty α = 0.6 [38]. These hyperparameters were chosen after experimentation o n the development set. We set the maximum output length during inference t o input length + 50, but terminate early when possible [38].

Table 2 summarizes our results and compares our translation quality and training costs t o other model architectures from the literature. We estimate the number o f floating point operations used t o train a model b y multiplying the training time, the number o f GPUs used, and a n estimate o f the sustained single-precision floating-point capacity o f each GPU 5.


## 6.2 Model Variations

To evaluate the importance o f different components o f the Transformer, w e varied our base model i n different ways, measuring the change i n performance o n English-t o-German translation o n the


## 5We used values o f 2.8, 3.7, 6.0 and 9.5 TFLOPS for K80, K40, M40 and P100, respectively.



Table 3: Variations o n the Transformer architecture. Unlisted values are identical t o those o f the base model. All metrics are o n the English-t o-German translation development set, newstest2013. Listed perplexities are per-wordpiece, according t o our byte-pair encoding, and should not b e compared t o per-word perplexities.

N dmodel dff h d k d v Pdrop ϵls train PPL BLEU params steps (dev) (dev) ×106base 6 512 2048 8 64 64 0.1 0.1 100K 4.92 25.8 65(A)


## 1 512 512 5.29 24.9


## 4 128 128 5.00 25.5


## 16 32 32 4.91 25.8


## 32 16 16 5.01 25.4

(B) 16 5.16 25.1 58


## 32 5.01 25.4 60

(C)


## 2 6.11 23.7 36


## 4 5.19 25.3 50


## 8 4.88 25.5 80


## 256 32 32 5.75 24.5 28


## 1024 128 128 4.66 26.0 168


## 1024 5.12 25.4 53


## 4096 4.75 26.2 90

(D)


## 0.0 5.77 24.6


## 0.2 4.95 25.5


## 0.0 4.67 25.3


## 0.2 5.47 25.7

(E) positional embedding instead o f sinusoids 4.92 25.7 big 6 1024 4096 16 0.3 300K 4.33 26.4 213development set, newstest2013. We used beam search a s described i n the previous section, but n o checkpoint averaging. We present these results i n Table 3.

In Table 3 rows (A), w e vary the number o f attention heads and the attention key and value dimensions, keeping the amount o f computation constant, a s described i n Section 3.2.2. While single-head attention i s 0.9 BLEU worse than the best setting, quality also drops off with too many heads.

In Table 3 rows (B), w e observe that reducing the attention key size d k hurts model quality. This suggests that determining compatibility i s not easy and that a more sophisticated compatibility function than dot product may b e beneficial. We further observe i n rows (C) and (D) that, a s expected, bigger models are better, and dropout i s very helpful i n avoiding over-fitting. In row (E) w e replace our sinusoidal positional encoding with learned positional embeddings [9], and observe nearly identical results t o the base model.


## 6.3 English Constituency Parsing

To evaluate i f the Transformer can generalize t o other tasks w e performed experiments o n English constituency parsing. This task presents specific challenges: the output i s subject t o strong structural constraints and i s significantly longer than the input. Furthermore, RNN sequence-t o-sequence models have not been able t o attain state-o f-the-art results i n small-data regimes [37].

We trained a 4-layer transformer with dmodel = 1024 o n the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) portion o f the Penn Treebank [25], about 40K training sentences. We also trained i t i n a semi-supervised setting, using the larger high-confidence and BerkleyParser corpora from with approximately 17M sentences [37]. We used a vocabulary o f 16K tokens for the WSJ only setting and a vocabulary o f 32K tokens for the semi-supervised setting.

We performed only a small number o f experiments t o select the dropout, both attention and residual (section 5.4), learning rates and beam size o n the Section 22 development set, all other parameters remained unchanged from the English-t o-German base translation model. During inference, w e

Table 4: The Transformer generalizes well t o English constituency parsing (Results are o n Section 23 o f WSJ) Parser Training WSJ 23 F1 Vinyals & Kaiser e l a l. (2014) [37] WSJ only, discriminative 88.3 Petrov e t a l. (2006) [29] WSJ only, discriminative 90.4 Zhu e t a l. (2013) [40] WSJ only, discriminative 90.4 Dyer e t a l. (2016) [8] WSJ only, discriminative 91.7 Transformer (4 layers) WSJ only, discriminative 91.3 Zhu e t a l. (2013) [40] semi-supervised 91.3 Huang & Harper (2009) [14] semi-supervised 91.3 McClosky e t a l. (2006) [26] semi-supervised 92.1 Vinyals & Kaiser e l a l. (2014) [37] semi-supervised 92.1 Transformer (4 layers) semi-supervised 92.7 Luong e t a l. (2015) [23] multi-task 93.0 Dyer e t a l. (2016) [8] generative 93.3increased the maximum output length t o input length + 300. We used a beam size o f 21 and α = 0.3 for both WSJ only and the semi-supervised setting.

Our results i n Table 4 show that despite the lack o f task-specific tuning our model performs surprisingly well, yielding better results than all previously reported models with the exception o f the Recurrent Neural Network Grammar [8].

In contrast t o RNN sequence-t o-sequence models [37], the Transformer outperforms the BerkeleyParser [29] even when training only o n the WSJ training set o f 40K sentences.


## 7 Conclusion

In this work, w e presented the Transformer, the first sequence transduction model based entirely o n attention, replacing the recurrent layers most commonly used i n encoder-decoder architectures with multi-headed self-attention.

For translation tasks, the Transformer can b e trained significantly faster than architectures based o n recurrent o r convolutional layers. On both WMT 2014 English-t o-German and WMT 2014 English-t o-French translation tasks, w e achieve a new state o f the art. In the former task our best model outperforms even all previously reported ensembles.

We are excited about the future o f attention-based models and plan t o apply them t o other tasks. We plan t o extend the Transformer t o problems involving input and output modalities other than text and t o investigate local, restricted attention mechanisms t o efficiently handle large inputs and outputs such a s images, audio and video. Making generation less sequential i s another research goals o f ours.

The code w e used t o train and evaluate our models i s available a t https://github.com/ tensorflow/tensor2tensor.

Acknowledgements We are grateful t o Nal Kalchbrenner and Stephan Gouws for their fruitful comments, corrections and inspiration.


## References

[1] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

[2] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation b y jointly learning t o align and translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473, 2014.

[3] Denny Britz, Anna Goldie, Minh-Thang Luong, and Quoc V. Le. Massive exploration o f neural machine translation architectures. CoRR, abs/1703.03906, 2017.

[4] Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata. Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733, 2016.

10[5] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078, 2014.

[6] Francois Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02357, 2016.

[7] Junyoung Chung, Çaglar Gülçehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation o f gated recurrent neural networks o n sequence modeling. CoRR, abs/1412.3555, 2014.

[8] Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and Noah A. Smith. Recurrent neural network grammars. In Proc. o f NAACL, 2016.

[9] Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. Convolutional sequence t o sequence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03122v2, 2017.

[10] Alex Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.

[11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings o f the IEEE Conference o n Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

[12] Sepp Hochreiter, Yoshua Bengio, Paolo Frasconi, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gradient flow i n recurrent nets: the difficulty o f learning long-term dependencies, 2001.

[13] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation,


## 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.

[14] Zhongqiang Huang and Mary Harper. Self-training PCFG grammars with latent annotations across languages. In Proceedings o f the 2009 Conference o n Empirical Methods i n Natural Language Processing, pages 832–841. ACL, August 2009.

[15] Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. Exploring the limits o f language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02410, 2016.

[16] Łukasz Kaiser and Samy Bengio. Can active memory replace attention? In Advances i n Neural Information Processing Systems, (NIPS), 2016.

[17] Łukasz Kaiser and Ilya Sutskever. Neural GPUs learn algorithms. In International Conference o n Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

[18] Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Karen Simonyan, Aaron van den Oord, Alex Graves, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural machine translation i n linear time. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.10099v2, 2017.

[19] Yoon Kim, Carl Denton, Luong Hoang, and Alexander M. Rush. Structured attention networks. In International Conference o n Learning Representations, 2017.

[20] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.

[21] Oleksii Kuchaiev and Boris Ginsburg. Factorization tricks for LSTM networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10722, 2017.

[22] Zhouhan Lin, Minwei Feng, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Mo Yu, Bing Xiang, Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. A structured self-attentive sentence embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03130, 2017.

[23] Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Lukasz Kaiser. Multi-task sequence t o sequence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06114, 2015.

[24] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. Effective approaches t o attentionbased neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.

11[25] Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice Santorini. Building a large annotated corpus o f english: The penn treebank. Computational linguistics, 19(2):313–330, 1993.

[26] David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark Johnson. Effective self-training for parsing. In Proceedings o f the Human Language Technology Conference o f the NAACL, Main Conference, pages 152–159. ACL, June 2006.

[27] Ankur Parikh, Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, and Jakob Uszkoreit. A decomposable attention model. In Empirical Methods i n Natural Language Processing, 2016.

[28] Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304, 2017.

[29] Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan Klein. Learning accurate, compact, and interpretable tree annotation. In Proceedings o f the 21st International Conference o n Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting o f the ACL, pages 433–440. ACL, July 2006.

[30] Ofir Press and Lior Wolf. Using the output embedding t o improve language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05859, 2016.

[31] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation o f rare words with subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.

[32] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-o f-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.

[33] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple way t o prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal o f Machine Learning Research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.

[34] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Rob Fergus. End-t o-end memory networks. In C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances i n Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pages 2440–2448. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.

[35] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc VV Le. Sequence t o sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances i n Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3104–3112, 2014.

[36] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jonathon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. CoRR, abs/1512.00567, 2015.

[37] Vinyals & Kaiser, Koo, Petrov, Sutskever, and Hinton. Grammar a s a foreign language. In Advances i n Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.

[38] Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, e t a l. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.

[39] Jie Zhou, Ying Cao, Xuguang Wang, Peng Li, and Wei Xu. Deep recurrent models with fast-forward connections for neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/1606.04199, 2016.

[40] Muhua Zhu, Yue Zhang, Wenliang Chen, Min Zhang, and Jingbo Zhu. Fast and accurate shift-reduce constituent parsing. In Proceedings o f the 51st Annual Meeting o f the ACL (Volume


## 1: Long Papers), pages 434–443. ACL, August 2013.

12Attention VisualizationsInput-Input Layer5ItisinthisspiritthatamajorityofAmericangovernmentshavepassednewlawssince2009makingtheregistrationorvotingprocessmoredifficult.<EOS><pad><pad><pad><pad><pad><pad>ItisinthisspiritthatamajorityofAmericangovernmentshavepassednewlawssince2009makingtheregistrationorvotingprocessmoredifficult.<EOS><pad><pad><pad><pad><pad><pad> Figure 3: An example o f the attention mechanism following long-distance dependencies i n the encoder self-attention i n layer 5 o f 6. Many o f the attention heads attend t o a distant dependency o f the verb ‘making’, completing the phrase ‘making...more difficult’. Attentions here shown only for the word ‘making’. Different colors represent different heads. Best viewed i n color.

13Input-Input Layer5TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad>TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad> Input-Input Layer5TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad>TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad> Figure 4: Two attention heads, also i n layer 5 o f 6, apparently involved i n anaphora resolution. Top: Full attentions for head 5. Bottom: Isolated attentions from just the word ‘its’ for attention heads 5 and 6. Note that the attentions are very sharp for this word.

14Input-Input Layer5TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad>TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad> Input-Input Layer5TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad>TheLawwillneverbeperfect,butitsapplicationshouldbejust-thisiswhatwearemissing,inmyopinion.<EOS><pad> Figure 5: Many o f the attention heads exhibit behaviour that seems related t o the structure o f the sentence. We give two such examples above, from two different heads from the encoder self-attention a t layer 5 o f 6. The heads clearly learned t o perform different tasks.

15